---
layout: post
title: 'New Digs'
is_unlisted: 1
---

With the recent [acquisition of Tilt by Airbnb](https://techcrunch.com/2017/02/22/airbnb-finalizes-deal-to-buy-social-payments-startups-tilt/) my old role evaporated ... meaning it was time to find a new address.  I learned a lot of great things at a small startup (we were around 50 people) and after two and a half years there, I feel like I got a good sense of what work at a smaller company looking for product/market fit was like.  For my next role I was aiming to go somewhere a little more established to understand the challenges that come with a company undergoing some major growth.

I've just joined <a href="https://www.lyft.com">Lyft</a> in an engineering manager role.  I've never liked having a car and I've structured my life in such a way that I can avoid a car commute (leaving the car more as a luxury item for errands and vacations).  Life is amazing when I don't have to get behind the wheel, completely focus my attention in the middle of hectic traffic, crawl through bumper to bumper traffic, wait at stop lights, and pray all the other drivers see you and don't make a mistake themselves.  The mission of giving people better transport options than their cars and removing car ownership as a blight on our cities is something I really identify with.

I'll be focusing to beefing up their mobile continuous integration and testing platform - a common theme running between my roles in industry, but this will be the first time I'll be able to focus on it completely as a full-time thing, rather than something we need to hack out in order to ship a product.  I'm very excited for what the new few months bring.
