---
layout: post
title: "Hopes for 2025"
---

I figured it would be interesting to write these down, and see how well I do (or don't do, as it were).

## Resume a consistent exercise schedule

I de-prioritized running to focus on other things in 2024; mainly reading and completing Advent of Code.  I'm usually happier if I can find the time to run two to three times a week.  I don't think this necessarily needs to be running; if this were a nice 45 minute walk every other day I think I'd be just as happy.

## Read 30 books (again)

I read > 30 books last year, mainly newer science fiction / fantasy.  To read thirty books I will need to do a little over two per month which seems fairly realistic.  (During my "high periods" in October/November I was finishing 2-3 books a week.)  Inevitably work gets busy, Cora gets sick, or I get interested in something else, so thirty books also seems like a somewhat lenient goal.  (However, I have vaguely commited to getting caught up on The Stormlight Archive.)

## More Cross-Stitch

I began cross-stiching last year to do a Christmas ornament for Cora, following something my mom did for me and my brothers growing up.  I lost steam in January (consumed by Advent of Code) but was able to do two ornaments this year.  I enjoy it; it's fiddly stuff and requires me to use my hands to create something physical, a bit different from any of my other hobbies.  The main thing I need is more practice.

## Four blog posts

Let's try to write four unique things for my blog (no, this doesn't count).  Tech-focused, personal-focused, whatever.  It'd be great if some of this spilled over into my work blog, which I'd also like to update more.

## Learn Rust

Working through Advent of Code last year really improved my skills in [Clojure](https://clojure.org/).  The last new language I really learned was Go in 2013.  While I've deepend my understanding of JavaScript, Perl, Java, and Python in the last ten years, I'd like to learn a "better C++" as there are times I really enjoy operating at that level of abstraction.

Some ideas for implementation:
* [Ray Tracing in a Weekend](https://raytracing.github.io/) - Creative Commons ray tracing books; I did some of this in undergrad.
* [Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/) - I bought this book last year; I certainly did enough of this programming in undergrad/graduate school, but it'd be nice to revisit the area.
* [LC3 VM](https://www.jmeiners.com/lc3-vm/) / [Synacor Challenge](https://github.com/Gyebro/synacor-challenge) / [UM](http://boundvariable.org/) - virtual machines that'd be fun to implement.  I've already implemented UM in Clojure as a mess of Java array interop, and it'd be great to see what it looks like in Rust.

I don't need to be an expert in it by the end of the year, but I would like to say, "yeah, this is a language I know".

## Find a new personal hobby project

I'd like another programming project to occupy me certain nights / weekends.  [Advent of Code]({% post_url 2024-06-10-advent-of-code %}) reminded me how wonderful having a project like this was.  It's not going to be something I can do all the time, but it is something that I'd like to have as part of my hobby rotation.

My last personal hobby project was my re-built chess engine [Ra](https://github.com/tildedave/ra-chess-engine), a rewrite of my grad school chess engine [Apep](https://github.com/tildedave/apep-chess-engine).  I rewrote Ra because I felt like Apep had too much copy/paste from [Crafty](https://craftychess.com/), I wanted to try a different board representation (10x12 instead of pure bitboards), I felt like Apep crashed too much, and I wanted to learn [Go](https://go.dev) better.  A few years later, I've accomplished all those goals.  Ra is incomplete in the sense that it still is not very smart about what a good chess position is, but Stockfish sets a high bar, and I'm not too interested in continuing the project much beyond the goals I've already accomplished.

When I think of my own experiences as a small child watching my dad program I could tell there was something interesting there, and I'd love a way to connect this hobby of mine with Cora when she get a little older.  Unfortunately a lot of my interests end up being fairly abstract.  I won't really know what my next hobby project is without exploring (why did I even want to program computer chess in the first place back in grad school?).  I hope over the next year I can find something that can turn into a 2-3 year project for more occasional hacking.
